docs: add application recipe documentation (#573)
ngi-nix/ngi-nix-forge: docs/manuals/contributor/how_to/app_recipe.md

# How to create an application recipe

::: {important}
For the list of all available configuration options for application recipes,
see the
[application options reference](https://ngi-nix.github.io/forge/recipe/options?s=apps).
:::

Before writing a recipe, spend some time understanding the software:

- Does it provide any GUI or CLI programs?
- Does it run any services?
- Does it depend on any external services (for example, a database)?

## Recipe file

Create the application recipe directory and recipe file:

```bash

> mkdir recipes/apps/<app-name>

Reviewer: To facilitate this, I've opened https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/pull/589

We have `-app` in the tree now, but with this we can remove it.

touch recipes/apps/<app-name>/recipe.nix
```

Add the recipe file to Git:

```bash
git add recipes/apps/<app-name>/recipe.nix
```

::: {important}
Nix can only see files tracked by Git. If the file is not added to Git, the
recipe will not be recognized.
:::

## Metadata

Start the recipe with the following content:

```nix
{
  pkgs,
  ...
}:

{

>   apps.my-app = {    # lowercase with hyphens

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  apps.my = {    # lowercase with hyphens
```

We shouldn't have `-app` suffix here. I think we did #531 partially.

All app recipes don't have `-app` suffix when declaring the app in their recipes.

Reviewer 2: I agreed with you at first, but now I actually I think it's fine as `my-app` since to me it seems like `-app` is not a suffix, but rather part of the name. Also, `apps.my` can be confusing.

Reviewer: I thought the same after seeing apps.my.

I suggest keeping it consistent then, use my-app everywhere or app-name everywhere

Author: I'll use `app-name`. Good point.

Author: Changed to `app-name`.

> {
>   apps.my-app = {    # lowercase with hyphens
>     displayName = "My App";
>     description = "Short description of the app.";
>     usage = ''
>       Usage instructions.
>     '';

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    usage = ''
      Usage instructions in markdown format.
      
      ```bash
      echo "with syntax highlighting"
      ```
    '';
```

  };

  # More configuration to be added here.
  # ...
}
```

### Links

> Add a `links` block with links to the project source, website, and documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add a [`links`](https://ngi.nixos.org/recipe/options?p=apps&p=packages&s=apps.%3Cname%3E.links) block that contains URLs to the project source, website, and documentation.
```

```nix
links = {
  website = "https://www.example.com";
  docs = "https://docs.example.com";
  source = "https://github.com/example/my-app";
};
```

### NGI grants

If the project is
[supported by an NGI grant via NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/project/),

> add a grants block:

Reviewer 2: Adapted from [NGIpkgs' `subgrant.nix`](https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/blob/d7c35a71abc13d983aaf6f2713e970cff0e5223b/maintainers/types/subgrant.nix)

```suggestion
In the NGI forge, we track: `Commons`, `Core`, `Entrust` and `Review`.
While the first three are current fund themes, `Review` encompasses all non-current NGI funds (e.g. Assure, Discovery, PET, ...).

See [NLnet - Thematics Funds](https://nlnet.nl/themes/) for more information.

#### Setting grants

1. Navigate to the [NLnet project page](https://nlnet.nl/project/index.html)
1. Search for a keyword related to the project (e.g. its name)
1. Confirm that results belong to the same project
1. Add their URL identifiers as the project's metadata, with: `https://nlnet.nl/project/<IDENTIFIER>/`
```

```nix
ngi.grants = {
  Commons = [
    "Example 1"
    "Example 2"
  ];
  Core = [
    "Example 1"
    "Example 2"
  ];
};
```

### Icon

> Add a custom icon if one is available. Otherwise the default icon will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add a custom icon if one is available. Otherwise, a fallback icon will be used.
```

```nix
icon = ./icon.svg;
```

::: {note}
Icons for some NLnet-supported projects can be found

> [here](https://nlnet.nl/gallery/hex.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in [this page](https://nlnet.nl/gallery/hex.html).
```

:::

## Programs

Add a `programs` block if the application provides GUI or CLI programs.

### Runtimes

Forge supports two program runtimes.

#### "program" runtime

The _program_ runtime is suitable for a single GUI program. Program is launched

> automatically when the runtime command is executed.

Reviewer 2: Although the meaning of `launched automatically` may be clearer with an example

```suggestion
The _program_ runtime is suitable for a single-executable GUI program, which is launched automatically when the runtime command is executed.
```

```nix
programs = {
  runtimes.program.enable = true;
  mainPackage = pkgs.my-app-gui;  # launched automatically
};
```

#### "shell" runtime

The _shell_ runtime drops the user into a shell environment where one or more

> GUI or CLI programs are available. Programs must be launched manually.

Reviewer 2: An example to illustrate how to 1) enter the shell and 2) launch the programs would be nice.

Author: Example added for both program and shell runtime.

```nix
programs = {
  runtimes.shell.enable = true;
  packages = [
    pkgs.my-app-gui  # GUI program available in the shell environment
    pkgs.my-app-cli  # CLI program available in the shell environment
  ];
};
```

## Services

Add a `services` block if the application provides some services. It can contain
single or multiple services called _service components_.

Start with runtime-independent service configuration. The only required option
is `command`, which specifies the executable to start the service. Additional
`command` arguments are passed using `argv` option. Services typically also need
a configuration file, which can be supplied via `configData` option.

Service user and state directory (persistent data directory) are automatically
created and managed by Forge and can be customized using `user` and `stateDir`

> options if required.

Reviewer 2: This feels a bit like too much information at once. Perhaps each sections should be accompanied by a code example as is the case, below. We could split this whole section into smaller subsections:

```md
## Services

What a service is and what it's made out of.

### Required Options
### Managing State
### Environment Variables
...
```

Author: I have separated user and stateDir instruction to another section.

> TODO: document `extraComponents` after [#425](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/issues/425) is merged.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it would be better for this to be a comment:

```suggestion
<!-- TODO: document `extraComponents` after [#425](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/issues/425) is merged. -->
```

  components.my-service = {
    ...
    environment = {
      LOG_LEVEL = "info";
    }
    ...
  };
};
```

All service ports exposed to the user must be configured using the `ports` option. This list is
used to configure port mapping for the _container_ runtime and to configure port forwarding when
a _nixos_ system is launched in a VM.

```nix
services = {
  components.my-service = {
    ...
    ports = [
      "8080:8080"
      "8081:8081"
      "8082:8082"
    ];
    ...
  };
};
```

A pre-start script can be configured using the `preStart` option. The pre-start
script runs before the service start, including restarts. This is useful to
configure tasks like database migrations.

```nix
services = {
  components.my-service = {
    ...
    preStart = ''
      my-app makemigrations && my-app migrate
    '';
    ...
  };
};
```

Multiple services (service components) can be ordered using the `after` option to control
startup order.

```nix
services = {
  components.my-service-A = {
    ...
    ...
  };
  components.my-service-B = {
    ...
    after = [ "my-service-A" ];
    ...
  };
};
```

### Runtimes

Forge supports two service runtimes. At least one runtime must be enabled in

> order to start the service.

Reviewer 2: We should start with the definition of what a service runtime is, first.

Author: Maybe better to be done in some "Concepts" page.

In the _nixos_ runtime, each service component maps to a single systemd unit.
In the _container_ runtime, each service component maps to a single container.

> Both are named after the component name.

Reviewer 2: To me, it's more readable to list these first, then go into details into each one.

```suggestion
Forge supports two service runtimes. At least one runtime must be enabled in
order to start the service:

- **nixos**: each service component maps to a single systemd unit
- **container**: each service component maps to a single container

Both are named after the component name.
```

Author: Service runtimes section are redesigned little bit. Some content was moved to a particular runtime.

> Both are named after the component name.

Reviewer 2: What does "Both are named after the component name." mean, here?

Author: Removed.

Each runtime provides a `setup` option for configuring a one-off preparation script
at startup — for example, to create directory structure or copy configuration files.

Services are launched using [Nimi process manager](https://github.com/weyl-ai/nimi).
In _container_ runtime, Nimi script is configured as a container entrypoint. In

> case of _nixos_ runtime, Nimi script is launched by systemd service.

Reviewer 2: These details could be incorporated inside each section.

> #### "container" runtime

Reviewer 2: We should probably break this down into more sub-sections for better readability.

Author: This information was split between relevant runtimes.

[2026-06-05T09:07:28Z DEBUG tau-tower] Broadcasting on:
[2026-06-05T09:07:28Z DEBUG tau-tower] 	http://127.0.0.1:3002/tau.ogg
```

::: {note}
This command is intended for quick iteration during application recipe
development. The service runs inside a bubblewrap sandbox without user namespace
support, so operations that require user or group management — such as `chown
user:user` — will fail.
:::

Inspect bubblewrap command:

```bash
cat $(nix build .#<app-name>.services.<service> --no-link --print-out-paths)/bin/<service-name>-service-sandbox
```

When services are behaving as expected, run the whole application in
containers:

```bash
nix run .#<app-name>.container
```

#### Debugging

Build container artifacts (required for next steps):

```bash
nix build .#<app-name>.container --out-link build-container
```

Inspect run scripts:

```bash
tree ./build-container/
```

Inspect compose file:

```bash
podman-compose -f ./build-container/<app-name>/compose.yaml config
```

Inspect container image:

```bash
./build-container/bin/build-oci-images

podman load < <service-name>.tar
podman inspect localhost/<service-name>
```

Inspect service in a running container:

```bash

> nix run .#<app-name>.container

Reviewer: @imincik should we fix #531 before merging these docs?

Because when I read `<app-name>` I will try `mox.container` but not `mox-app.container`

Author: This will be resolved by #531 .
